docs/mac/signing.md, before:

---
summary: "Signing steps for macOS debug builds generated by packaging scripts"
read_when:
  - Building or signing mac debug builds
---
# mac signing (debug builds)

This app is usually built from `scripts/package-mac-app.sh`, which now:

- sets a stable debug bundle identifier: `com.steipete.clawdis.debug`
- writes the Info.plist with that bundle id (override via `BUNDLE_ID=...`)
- calls `scripts/codesign-mac-app.sh` to sign the main binary, bundled CLI, and app bundle so macOS treats each rebuild as the same signed bundle and keeps TCC permissions (notifications, accessibility, screen recording, mic, speech). Requires a valid signing identity.
- uses `CODESIGN_TIMESTAMP=auto` by default; it enables trusted timestamps for Developer ID signatures. Set `CODESIGN_TIMESTAMP=off` to skip timestamping (offline debug builds).
- injects build metadata into Info.plist: `ClawdisBuildTimestamp` (UTC) and `ClawdisGitCommit` (short hash) so the About pane can show build, git, and debug/release channel.
- reads `SIGN_IDENTITY` from the environment. Add `export SIGN_IDENTITY="Apple Development: Your Name (TEAMID)"` (or your Developer ID Application cert) to your shell rc to always sign with your cert; otherwise signing falls back to ad‑hoc.

## Usage

```bash
# from repo root
scripts/package-mac-app.sh               # ad-hoc signing
SIGN_IDENTITY="Developer ID Application: Your Name" scripts/package-mac-app.sh   # real cert

# set it once in your shell profile for convenience
echo 'export SIGN_IDENTITY="Apple Development: Your Name (TEAMID)"' >> ~/.zshrc
```

If you need a different bundle id (e.g. release build):

```bash
BUNDLE_ID=com.steipete.clawdis scripts/package-mac-app.sh
```

Signing identity selection:
- If `SIGN_IDENTITY` is unset, the script auto-picks a valid identity (Developer ID → Apple Distribution → Apple Development).
- If no identities exist, the script fails with an error (no ad‑hoc fallback).

## Build metadata for About

`package-mac-app.sh` stamps the bundle with:
- `ClawdisBuildTimestamp`: ISO8601 UTC at package time
- `ClawdisGitCommit`: short git hash (or `unknown` if unavailable)

The About tab reads these keys to show version, build date, git commit, and whether it’s a debug build (via `#if DEBUG`). Run the packager to refresh these values after code changes.

## Why

TCC permissions are tied to the bundle identifier *and* code signature. Unsigned debug builds with changing UUIDs were causing macOS to forget grants after each rebuild. Signing the binaries (ad‑hoc by default) and keeping a fixed bundle id/path (`dist/Clawdis.app`) preserves the grants between builds, matching the VibeTunnel approach.

Commit message:

docs: add macOS developer setup and troubleshooting guides

docs/mac/signing.md, after:

---
summary: "Signing steps for macOS debug builds generated by packaging scripts"
read_when:
  - Building or signing mac debug builds
---
# mac signing (debug builds)

This app is usually built from `scripts/package-mac-app.sh`, which now:

- sets a stable debug bundle identifier: `com.steipete.clawdis.debug`
- writes the Info.plist with that bundle id (override via `BUNDLE_ID=...`)
- calls `scripts/codesign-mac-app.sh` to sign the main binary, bundled CLI, and app bundle so macOS treats each rebuild as the same signed bundle and keeps TCC permissions (notifications, accessibility, screen recording, mic, speech). Requires a valid signing identity.
- uses `CODESIGN_TIMESTAMP=auto` by default; it enables trusted timestamps for Developer ID signatures. Set `CODESIGN_TIMESTAMP=off` to skip timestamping (offline debug builds).
- inject build metadata into Info.plist: `ClawdisBuildTimestamp` (UTC) and `ClawdisGitCommit` (short hash) so the About pane can show build, git, and debug/release channel.
- **Packaging requires Bun**: The embedded gateway relay is compiled using `bun`. Ensure it is installed (`curl -fsSL https://bun.sh/install | bash`).
- reads `SIGN_IDENTITY` from the environment. Add `export SIGN_IDENTITY="Apple Development: Your Name (TEAMID)"` (or your Developer ID Application cert) to your shell rc to always sign with your cert; otherwise signing falls back to ad‑hoc.

## Usage

```bash
# from repo root
scripts/package-mac-app.sh               # ad-hoc signing
SIGN_IDENTITY="Developer ID Application: Your Name" scripts/package-mac-app.sh   # real cert
```

### Ad-hoc Signing Note
When signing with `SIGN_IDENTITY="-"` (ad-hoc), the script automatically disables the **Hardened Runtime** (`--options runtime`). This is necessary to prevent crashes when the app attempts to load embedded frameworks (like Sparkle) that do not share the same Team ID.

## Build metadata for About

`package-mac-app.sh` stamps the bundle with:
- `ClawdisBuildTimestamp`: ISO8601 UTC at package time
- `ClawdisGitCommit`: short git hash (or `unknown` if unavailable)

The About tab reads these keys to show version, build date, git commit, and whether it’s a debug build (via `#if DEBUG`). Run the packager to refresh these values after code changes.

## Why

TCC permissions are tied to the bundle identifier *and* code signature. Unsigned debug builds with changing UUIDs were causing macOS to forget grants after each rebuild. Signing the binaries (ad‑hoc by default) and keeping a fixed bundle id/path (`dist/Clawdis.app`) preserves the grants between builds, matching the VibeTunnel approach.
